= OpenFastPath Development Practices
Jere Lepp√§nen <jere.leppanen@nokia.com>
:max-width: 600px
:numbered:
:toc:



== Introduction

This document defines those OpenFastPath (OFP) development practices,
which every contributor should be aware of. This document should
enable contributors to be consistent where it matters, it is not an
exhaustive list of rules.

OFP follows a subset of Linux kernel development practices, also used
in many other open source projects. Contributors are expected to have
some familiarity with development practices in kernel development or
other open source projects with similar practices.

A quick summary of the mandatory stages of getting a change into OFP:

. Changes are submitted as patches to the mailing list <<mail>>.

. Patches are discussed and reviewed on the mailing list.

. Once a patch has been reviewed and accepted, a Maintainer pushes it
  to the repository <<repo>>.



== Problems and Questions

The mailing list is the best way to contact other developers
and the Maintainers. Support requests and questions should be sent to
the mailing list.

Bugs should be reported via <<issues,GitHub Issues>>.

Github interface for pull requests is not used.



== Coding Style

Linux kernel coding style <<kstyle>> is used. See also <<kdp4coding>>.

Global functions and variables are prefixed with "ofp_".

BSD/libuinet style <<bsdstyle>> structures are used.

Copyright and license <<license>> information must appear at the top
of each source file, using the following template:
----
/*
 * Copyright (c) <year>, <company1>
 * Copyright (c) <year>, <company2>
 * Copyright (c) <year>, <person>
 * All rights reserved.
 *
 * SPDX-License-Identifier:     BSD-3-Clause
 */
----



== Preparing Patches

<<ksubmit>> and <<kdp5posting>> describe how to prepare patches for
submission. The main points are:

* Patches should be small.

* Each logically independent change should be formatted as a separate
  patch.

* Each patch should yield working code.

* The first line of a patch comment should be a short one-line
  description of the change, in imperative mood.

* A patch comment should describe what is changed and why.

Each patch set should add its own tests. When implementation is added,
the corresponding unit tests should be added in separate patches in
the same patch set.

Before posting patches, make sure all old and new unit test cases
pass.

The kernel checkpatch.pl script <<checkpatch>> should be used to check
patches before submitting. Example: `$ git show --pretty=email
<commit> | linux/scripts/checkpatch.pl --show-types --no-tree
--max-line-length=150 --ignore
ASSIGN_IN_IF,TRAILING_STATEMENTS,GLOBAL_INITIALISERS,
C99_COMMENTS,NEW_TYPEDEFS,FILE_PATH_CHANGES -`

Use the -s option in git commit to add your Signed-off-by tag line
before posting patches. If a patch has multiple authors, there should
be one Signed-off-by tag line for each author.

=== "Fixes" Tags.

If a commit is a fix to a bug, it should include at least one Fixes
tag line. This tag line may contain:

* Abbreviated commit hash and commit title, e.g. as listed by git log
  --oneline. Example: `Fixes: 41d53bb Add epoll set to socket
  structure`

* The number and title of a GitHub Issue, with the number prefixed
  with the number sign "#". Example: `Fixes: #99 TCP issue with big
  file transfer`

Each bug should be fixed by a separate patch, unless boundaries aren't
clear or bugs are intertwined so that the fixes can't be separated.
If a patch corrects multiple problems, each one is recorded on its own
"Fixes" line. If multiple patches together fix one problem, then each
patch has the same "Fixes" line.



== Posting and Reviewing

Patches are posted to the mailing list <<mail>> using git send-email.

When posting patches to a branch other than master, use the option
`--subject-prefix="PATCH <name>"`, where <name> is the name of the
branch.

All changes should be reviewed. Every commit must have at least one
"Reviewed-by" tag line from a Maintainer, who must not
be with the same company as the author. Once a Maintainer has reviewed
a patch and notified the mailing list, the patch may be pushed after
two office days have passed, unless there are unaddressed comments
made by others before or during that time.

Reviewers may send their tag lines as a reply to a patch, to be added
to the final revision of the patch by the patch author, or to be added
by a Maintainer before the patch is pushed. Tags defined in
<<kdp5posting>> and <<ksubmit>> may be used, other tags should be
avoided.

A Maintainer may authorize another person to review a patch on his
behalf. Also in this case the reviewer should not be with the same
company as the author. Once the review has been concluded, the
Maintainer should accept the review by sending his "Acked-by" tag.

See also <<kdp5posting>> and <<kdp6flwt>>.



== Branches

The "cactus" branching model advocated by <<judin>> is used. The
strength of this model is its simplicity and its focus on master, the
one eternal branch. A perfect fit for OFP, which is small and where
there are no commercial or legal obligations related to release
maintenance.

=== master

Latest and greatest. "Unstable". Development happens on master.

There are no merges to master other than fast-forward and
cherry-pick. Bug fixes may be cherry-picked from release branches, but
a better way of working is to fix the problem on master first, then
cherry-pick the fix to the current release branch.

=== Release Branches

Branched from master. Stable. Releases are tagged on release branches.

The only changes should be bug fixes. Bug fixes may be cherry-picked
from master. In some cases, the TSC may decide to cherry-pick new
functionality from master, as long as compatibility is preserved.

The name of a release branch is the name of the release in lowercase.

=== Feature Branches

<<judin>> argues against long lived feature branches, but sometimes
you need a shared feature branch. One way to resolve this is to have a
shared feature branch, which is rebased regularly. That way the branch
isn't long lived, since it's in fact new every time it's rebased. By
rebasing every week or every day, you effectively end up integrating
early and often. As the amount of changes on a feature branch
increases over time, the rebase will get increasingly onerous. This
should provide contributors an incentive to submit their patches.

Only Maintainers can push to the public repository, so contributors
will have to keep their feature branches elsewhere. For example Github
forks may be used for this purpose.

Ultimately contributors may use feature branches in any way they want,
as long as the end result is a clean patch set, which applies to
master HEAD.



== Tagging

All tags are annotated tags, which record who created the tag and
when. Tag comments are rarely seen and therefore don't matter
much. "Tag <tag>.", where <tag> is the tag name, is a good enough
comment for a tag.

All tags conform to <<semver>>.

A release tag is exactly the same as the semantic version of the
release.

Release candidate tags are of the form <ver>-rc.<ordinal>, where <ver>
is the release version and <ordinal> starts at 1 for each release and
is incremented with every new tag. For example, the first release
candidate tag for 2.1.0 would be "2.1.0-rc.1", without the quotes.



== Release Process

Release stages and the policies this process is based on, are defined
in <<relpol>>. The release process may begin once the TSC decides that
development is ready, and sufficient time, defined in <<relpol>>, has
passed since announcing the End of Life of the previous release.

. Library versions are incremented on master according to what kind of
  changes have been made to the ABI of each library since the previous
  release. The usual rules are followed:

    * If there are only bug fixes, then the patch version is
      incremented.

    * If there are compatible ABI changes, then the minor version is
      incremented and patch version set to zero.

    * If there are incompatible ABI changes, then the major version is
      incremented and minor and patch versions set to zero.

. A release branch is created by branching from master. The branch
  point may be master HEAD or some earlier commit on master.

. If the branch point is not master head, some cherry-picks may be
  needed in this stage. Merging or cherry-picking from elsewhere than
  master should be avoided.

. Once the release criteria is met and the TSC makes the decision, the
  release branch is tagged with a release candidate tag.

. Availability of the new release candidate is announced on the
  mailing list.

. When problems are found, the fixes are applied on the release
  branch, and a new release candidate tag created. Each release tag
  should be announced, so it's probably best to wait for at least a
  few days between release candidates.

. Once the criteria defined in the policy is met and the release
  candidate is ready to be released, the last release candidate is
  tagged with a release tag.

. Availability of the new release is announced on the mailing list and
  announcements web page.

The process for patch releases is simpler. As soon as the TSC decides
it's time for a patch release, the release branch is tagged and the
announcement made.



=== Announcements

Release announcements are posted on the announcements web page and the
mailing list. Release candidates are announced only on the mailing
list, not on the web page.

The subject of the message to the mailing list should be
`[ANNOUNCEMENT] OpenFastPath <name> <ver> <what>.`, where <name> is
the name of the release, <ver> is the version and <what> is what's
happening. <what> may be for example `is available` or `is reaching
End of Life`.

The post on the mailing list and the announcements web page should
include exactly the same information.



== References

[bibliography]

* [[[bsdstyle]]] BSD style(9) man page.
  https://www.freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi?query=style&sektion=9

* [[[issues]]] OFP GitHub Issues.
  https://github.com/OpenFastPath/ofp/issues

* [[[checkpatch]]] Linux kernel checkpatch.pl script.
  https://git.kernel.org/cgit/linux/kernel/git/torvalds/linux.git/tree/scripts/checkpatch.pl

* [[[judin]]] A Successful GIT Branching Model Considered Harmful. Jussi Judin.
  https://barro.github.io/2016/02/a-succesful-git-branching-model-considered-harmful/

* [[[kdp4coding]]] A guide to the Kernel Development Process, Chapter 4. Coding.
  https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/Documentation/process/4.Coding.rst

* [[[kdp5posting]]] A guide to the Kernel Development Process, Chapter 5. Posting.
  https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/Documentation/process/5.Posting.rst

* [[[kdp6flwt]]] A guide to the Kernel Development Process, Chapter 6. Followthrough.
  https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/Documentation/process/6.Followthrough.rst

* [[[kstyle]]] Linux kernel coding style.
  https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/Documentation/process/coding-style.rst

* [[[ksubmit]]] How to Get Your Change Into the Linux Kernel or Care And Operation Of Your Linus Torvalds.
  https://github.com/torvalds/linux/blob/master/Documentation/process/submitting-patches.rst

* [[[license]]] BSD 3-clause "New" or "Revised" License.
  http://spdx.org/licenses/BSD-3-Clause

* [[[mail]]] OFP mailing list.
  openfastpath@list.openfastpath.org
  http://www.openfastpath.org/mailman/listinfo/openfastpath

* [[[relpol]]] OpenFastPath Release Policy.
  https://github.com/OpenFastPath/ofp/blob/master/docs/release-policy.adoc

* [[[repo]]] OFP Repository.
  https://github.com/OpenFastPath/ofp

* [[[semver]]] Semantic Versioning 2.0.0.
  http://semver.org/spec/v2.0.0.html
